Welcome back everyone in this lecture.
We're going to have a quick crash course in the PI library Pi is a scientific computing and mathematical
library.
We're going to use at times during the course to just quickly generate some morays or matrices of data.
So our main goal for this lecture is just to understand the various functions that are used later on
in the course that allow us to generate data to plot it out using plot Lee and dash in case you're not
using our environment file.
You can install non-pilot with Pipp install them pie or install them pie directly at your command line.
For this particular lecture I'm just going to be running the commands directly into the command line
instead of running a PI script.
However you should know that the fulled up postscript with all the commands I show here is provided
for you in the notes in case you want to reference it.
So let's go to our text editor and open up our terminal there.
Or if you want just open up your command prompt directly.
Let's get started.
OK so if you follow it along with our installation setup guide should now have the platform real terminal
here and create a new terminal.
And then what you can do is in this new terminal just call I Python enter and you should be able to
now run Piet's on commands where it supports that nice syntax highlighting as an alternative if you
prefer not to use the terminal inside of Adam.
You can just open up your terminal outside of Adam or if you're on a Windows computer you can just open
up your command line.
So for instance here I can just click on my command prompt and now I have my command prompt open here
and outside of them I can also call Python and I get the same thing.
So for the purposes of just fill in this lecture I'll just be running all the commands here at the command
prompt.
So let's minimize this guy open a command prompt again and let's get started.
So one of the very first things I'm going to do here is I'm going to import some PI as an P and that
allows me now to call some.
So our main goal here is to figure out how do we create large arrays are large matrices quickly and
easily if not pie.
So I can plot them out with partly in-dash as we learn how those tools work well one way is by converting
a python list into an array.
So I can say my list is equal to 1 2 3 4 and then convert it to an umpire Ray by saying N.P. array and
then just passing in my list.
And if I run that now I can see I have an array.
Keep in mind it hasn't actually affected the normal list.
So if I check the type of my list here it's still just a list.
If I actually want to change that list I would have to save it over to another variable.
So it could do something like my variable A R R is equal to and appear Re of my list.
And then I can check the type of they are.
And it's an umpire.
And if I enter again I can see here I have my array.
OK so now let's go over some built in functions in non-pilot though allows to quickly create summaries
one of them which is most common is the arr. function and the arr. function is just like the range function
in Python where it takes an a start a stop and an optional step size.
So I will say a is equal to a range.
And we're going to say from 0 up to and not including 10.
So what this is is going to return back in array of integers and the default step size is 1 and it's
going to go from zero.
Step size of one all the way up to but not including 10.
So that means when I check what is it's an array 0 1 2 3 all the way tonight.
So it goes up to and including 10 just like Python's range function.
Now if I want to add in an optional step size what I can do if I hit upon my arrow key I can add in
a third argument as a step size.
So for instance going step size of two.
And now when I check a 0 2 4 6 8.
So that's the range function.
It works just like Python's builtin range function.
Now we can also create an array of zeros by saying and the zeros and here if we want to create a two
dimensional array.
What I can do is just pass in the dimensions as a tuple so I can say Give me a five by five.
So notice here how in passing the tuple That's why I have two sets of princes into zeroes.
So I'm passing if I buy five tuple zeros and I want to enter.
Now I get back a to them missional array.
Often referred to as a matrix and I have five by five.
So five rows and five columns.
That first number of five is going to be the number of rows.
The second number five is number of columns.
So let's make that clear by saying zeros and then saying one by 10.
And then when you run that you can see I have one row and 10 columns or if I do this two by 10 I now
have two rows and 10 columns.
So the first numbers is the rows.
Second number is the columns just like there's a zero's function.
There's also a one function so we can say same thing and the ones give me two by four matrix and a set
of all zeros.
It's all ones notice here that for both zeros and ones there's a little decimal point after that 0 and
after that one.
And that just indicates that 0 and 1 integers actually floating point numbers.
So the type of one point zero is a flow.
And that's actually the same as a type of one point.
That's also a float.
It's just to differentiate between type of one by itself which would then be an integer.
So non-pilot likes to convert things to float.
If you provide them as integers.
OK.
Now let's move on to actually creating random arrays of integers.
So we want some random distribution to our numbers and instead of something like all zeros or all ones.
Luckily none pi has its own built in random library with lots of useful functions and features for us.
So something we may need to do is create a random array of integers.
So the way we do that is we say N.P. that random dot and then for random integers this is a uniform
distribution.
We can say Ranz R and D I N T and you give delimits.
So you get the lower limit and the upper limit.
And what this is going to do is it's going to return a random number between 0 and 100.
So if I were to run this again it returns back forty nine.
If I run this again returns back 96 and if you run this on your computer you'll see different random
numbers between zero and 100.
If you actually want an array of these random integers as a third argument what you can do is pass in
a desired shape of the result.
So for example if I want a five by five matrix of random numbers uniformly distributed from 0 to 100.
What I can then do is pass and as the third argument that 5 by 5.
So then when I hit enter I have a 5 by 5 matrix of randomly chosen numbers from 0 to 100.
And what uniform distribution means it's just that every number between 0 and 100 has the same likelihood
of being picked.
OK so that's how you can make a random array of numbers as far as integers are concerned.
We can also create a linearly spaced array and the way we do that is by saying end p dot Lynn space
and here we can say from 0 to 10.
So we have a start and stop the as a third argument.
What we do is we say how many actual numbers do we want linearly space between 0 and 10.
So let's imagine I want six numbers from 0 to 10 that are linearly spaced that are returns back zero
to four six eight 10.
So those are six numbers and the space between each of those numbers is the same.
It's two.
Now if I were to say something like and P lens space notice how it's just like an L I N E.
Space from 0 to 10 and I say OK now give me a hundred in one evenly spaced numbers then we get a lot
more.
Now the space is 0.1 and I can keep doing this for large or small numbers so I can say N.P. space 0
to 10.
And then however numbers how many numbers are elements you want linearly spaced from that starting point
to that start point.
So if I say 200 then I get back 200 numbers all evenly spaced from zero to 10.
OK.
So now we're finally going to discuss some PI operations.
So we just saw how we could create random numbers.
But often especially for testing purposes it's nice if you could generate the same random numbers over
and over again.
That way you could actually compare results especially if you're working along this course.
You'll try to get the same random numbers that I do in order to do that.
We need to set a random seed so we can say N.P. random seed and then you pass in just an arbitrary number
the number itself isn't actually important.
What's important is that you're passing in the same number over and over again or you're passing the
same number that I'm using right now.
So I like to pasan 101.
Again it's a totally arbitrary choice.
But what this does is it sets a seed to a random number generator and then pi.
And that way when I ask for a random rant I see again from let's say zero to 100 and let's say I just
want 10 random numbers from zero to 100.
If I enter now.
If you're following along with me you should now actually have the same ran the numbers 95 11 81 and
so on.
Keep in mind you have to call this seed directly before calling this random integer line because if
you run this line again the random integer line then you're going to get another set of random numbers.
However if you were to run it just like I did seed random integer random integer these two sets of arrays
should be the same for you.
So a lot of times we are going to do is in our scripts since that PI scripts are going to be run over
and over again we can do is at the very top of our thought Paice grip.
So a seed that way in case we ever use random numbers you can be assured that you'll also get the same
random numbers.
So you can fairly compare your results.
So that's all random that seed is doing OK.
Now a few more umpire operations that you may find useful are things like max min mean.
So let's quickly show you those are going to create an array and we'll say an arrays and the random
random integers from 0 to 100 and we'll say give me 10 random integers there.
So if I take a look in my array it's those 10 random integers and it's not super important that you
get the same random ones I do right now but we can do is off of an array.
You can call Max and it will give you back the maximum the value in the array.
In my case it was 83.
You can also call men and those I have open and close parentheses and then it returns back the minimum
value of the array.
Keep in mind if you forget those print sees if you just say a r r or whatever the variable name of your
array is that men and enter it's going to report back hey you have this function that you could call
in order to actually figure out what your minimum value is.
You need to have those open and close print seats right next to it and then return back and there's
a bunch of other ones you can do.
But these are mainly the ones we're going to be using in the course Max.
Men can also get mean or turn back the mean value of all those numbers in the array.
And if you want the location of the max value or the minimum value where you can do is instead of just
saying max or min you can use ARG Max and those were RMX those returns back to the index location of
that maximum value.
So for call that in Python and in some pie indexing starts at zero.
So zero locations have 49.
So at one location we have 83 mean that the location of that max value is in expositional on can it
the same thing for men.
So notice here if we go 0 1 to the location of the minimum value of 8 it should be in this location
to say our call argument and it returns back index location 2 which makes sense because it's seen the
location of the minimum value of 8.
And then finally if you ever want to reshape an array often what people do is they'll create a one dimensional
array and then reshape it to them.
All right.
And you can do that quite easily using the reshape command you just off of your array.
Call the method reshape and then passen whatever that mentions you want to reshape to for instance since
I have a 1 by 10 array here.
I could reshape it to be a two by five array.
And now I have two rows by five columns Finally let's discuss indexing unmasking to show you this.
I'm going to quickly create a new to them Minshull matrix or to them missional array will say our variable
math is equal to p arr. and we're going to go from 0 to 100 and then I'm going to stack some methods
here.
So I'll say arrange range and off of that object I'm going to reshape it to be 10 by 10.
So now if I take a look at my matrix I have zero through nine nine They're 10 rows by 10 columns.
Perfect.
Let's imagine that you wanted to select an individual number off of this.
The format for that is you call your variable then use square brackets or square braces and pasand the
row value you want and then the column value you want.
For example let's grab 52.
So 52 the index row in.
If you start counting 0 1 2 3 4 5.
It's going to be at row 5 then comma and the column it's in the index to 0 1 2.
And then you just close off those square brackets.
And now you get 52.
And it's really it's easy to see in this example how that first number correlates to the row in that
second number there actually correlates to the column.
So that's how it works for actually just grabbing a single element of a matrix if you want to grab an
entire column.
All you need to do is say Matt and then use a colon instead of an actual number.
And then just provide the column number you want.
So for instance to and then I can get back the Saray here.
So what is this actually saying.
It's saying hey for column 2 the colon says Give me back every single row and column 2.
So if we look at column two every single rows to 12 22 32 and so on.
And likewise you can do the opposite to get back an entire row.
So this first one right here that was showed it brings back everything in column two if we wanted everything
in a row to what I would do just the reverse.
I would say in row two comma give me back every single column value.
So that's two comma colon.
Hit enter.
And now I have an array of that row 20 21 etc. and keep in mind it's returning the back as one dimensional
arrays.
But you can always use reshape in order to shape them back into whatever format you want.
Now we're going to talk about masking and masking allows you to use conditional filters to grab elements
and we're going to see a lot more about this in Pandas.
So this is just a little primer of an introduction.
Let's imagine that we have our matrix again.
And it's all the numbers from 0 to 99 all the integers that is if I say Matt greater than 50.
So I do some sort of boolean conditional check here or a comparison operation.
It's going to return back a really interesting matrix and this matrix is a matrix of boolean values
where false indicates where the matrix was not greater than 50 and true in the case where the Saray
was greater than 50.
So I have a matrix of boolean values here and then I can pass this in as a filter back into my matrix
in order to only select the values or elements where this happened to be true.
So what does that mean.
Well I can say Matt square break braces mats greater than 50 enter and now I only have the values that
are greater than 50.
We're going to touch a lot more on this sort of example when we talk about Panas coming up next.
OK.
That's really all we need to know for pi.
In fact a lot of this is more just the primer to get you ready for pandas which is really the workhorse
we used during this course as far as dealing with data.
If you have any questions feel free to post the Q&A forums.
But that's the basics of what you need to know for an umpire for this course.
Thanks and I'll see you at the next lecture.